---
title: An endless Void
tags:
  - Philosophy
  - Short Fiction
  - Science Fiction
date: '2015-07-08'
excerpt: "I awoke and found myself floating through a void. I was aware of it, but it seemed oblivious of my presence. I seemed to be moving quicker and quicker through space, I don't know how I know this to be true, but I do."
layout: 'post'
---

I awoke and found myself floating through a void. I was aware of it,
but it seemed oblivious of my presence. I seemed to be moving quicker
and quicker through space, I don't know how I know this to be true,
but I do. I felt as though I was drawn to something that was not yet
visible, or perhaps something that would never be visible, the
invisible things are the most deceptive. They creep up on you slowly
but surely, and you don't realize till they're there staring you in
the face. Of course you don't have the luxury of staring at them, you,
the visible, do not know where it is, and therefore it is everywhere.

Moving through the void is like swimming through an endless ocean, of
course this metaphor doesn't help unless you have found yourself
swimming in an endless ocean, most people haven't. I don't know how
long I've been thinking about a good metaphor, it could be an a few
seconds, or perhaps a decade, I wouldn't be able to say
which. Perhaps, despite my intuitive feeling of motion, I am in fact
stationary. Unfortunately, I couldn't say what is fact, and what is
fantasy.

When there is very little, one can take comfort in the seemingly
mundane. At least you experience something, even if that something is
nothing. I spent what seems like quite a long time experiencing my
hand closing and opening. Eventually, I could feel individual muscles
contracting, the dizzying nervous system impulses dancing down my arm,
and the tendons pulling on my bones. I loose myself in myself,
understanding all that is to be understood.

Soon the void becomes much richer, but it is unclear if I am creating
a world inside my own head and projecting it upon the void or if the
void itself has lost its identity. Despite this uncertainty it becomes
important to accept these perceptions as real. It's entirely likely
that the world is a projection, but it is better to avoid this truth
and find meaning in the projection.
