---
title: Universal Types
permalink: /universal-types/
excerpt: "These types generally take the form of persistent trees. This allows
people to modify them as they wish and recover from any unexpected changes. I
have in mind that these objects will be stored in a collections framework that
allows for common operations over most data structures"
tags: 
  - Ideas
  - Programming
date: '2016-01-15'
image: '/public/ideas/types.png'
---

These types generally take the form of persistent trees. This allows people to
modify them as they wish and recover from any unexpected changes. I have in mind
that these objects will be stored in a collections framework that allows for
common operations over most data structures, called
[UDB](https://devinmcgloin.com/udb).

## Building Blocks

I think that every item can be composed of these core primitives. If you think
otherwise send me an email with an example that breaks the system.

- text
- locations
- audio
- video
- messages
- number
- time
- transactions

This primitives along with an alias system allow for any type to be created.

## Common Functions

Because these types are consistent, and supported throughout the system, you can
apply common filters, sorts, or apply functions to every item in the
collection.

For example, I would like to find a contact of mine, but I've forgotten their
name. I know I added them recently, and that they didn't give me their email. I
ought to filter by contacts who do not have an email, then sort by how recently
I added them. I have about 600 contacts in my address book, and neither of these
operations would take much time, even if they are not heavily optimized.

Imagine the power if you could do that for all these data types. You could find
the closest *x* just by getting a list of *x*, then because they have a
location, you can find out their distance from your current location. The coffee
shop use case has been polished, and for coffee shops its super easy. What if
you're looking on someones blog for good gluten free restaurants in Sacramento.
You think this person knows what they're talking about, and you'd like to know
how far away all of them are.

Well, right now you have to type them all in to google maps, or have knowledge
of the area to figure out how far away they are. This is obviously sub optimal.
If you have a list of restaurants, even just their names and a general
geographical location, you ought to be able to find the distance from you to
them without having to code something to do it, or type in 10 address to google,
and compare across multiple tabs.

This is basically an [Entity Component
Model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entity_component_system) applied to general
programming.

## Items

Each item has an identifier and a series of `key:val` pairs. Each of these keys
indicates that the item has a attribute of that type. If the item has multiple
values of the same type then they just form an array under the specified key.
`key:[val1, val2]`

### Representing Items

Suppose you have a news article:

```
article1209{
  author: Devin McGloin
  title: Universal Types
  date: 2016-01-29
  text: These types generally take the form of persistent trees...
  source: http://blog.devinmcgloin.com/universal-types
}
```

All articles are based off this template:

```
article{
  author:
  title:
  date:
  text:
  source:
}
```

Some of these are not in list of primitives above. `author` is an alias for
`person`. An author looks like this:

```
author{
  alias: person
}
person{
  first-name:
  middle-name:
  last-name:
  email:
  phoneNumber:
  address:
  employer:
  hometown:
}
```

### Interfaces

We need a mechanism to ensure that each alias is what it says it is. This is
only an issue for aliased types, and not compositions. If the alias is not a
subset it does not need to be verified, as all members of text can be aliased as
strings. However, a url would be aliased from text, but is actually a subset of
text.

For text the answer is somewhat simple, have regex matching patterns that
confirm the identity of the alias.


```
url{
  alias: text
  matches: #\b(([\w-]+://?|www[.])[^\s()<>]+(?:\([\w\d]+\)|([^[:punct:]\s]|/)))#iS
}
```

I don't see a use case for aliasing `location` for example, to a smaller subset
that doesn't result in a new composite type. If you do, please get in touch!

### Algebraic Types

The `source` item in the article template is a rather vague term, in fact this
is intentional, as we would like to define a generic article, rather than have a
web-article with a url, and a journal-article with a journal edition. We'd like
to treat those two things as part of the same greater idea.

A good solution to this problem is introducing algebraic datatypes. Composition
already covers the `and` use case, so what we're really look for is `either`.
The source is either a url, isbn or a journal. Either does not allow for both a
url and an ISBN.

```
source{
  either: [url, isbn, journal]
}
```

## More to do

Obviously, there is a lot more do do around these ideas. If you find them
interesting I'd love to talk with you!
