---
title: 'Dealing with Unkown Unknowns'
date: '2019-06-24'
tags:
  - Philosophy
  - Software
layout: 'post'
excerpt: >-
  Unknown Unknowns are things that you don’t know you don’t know, made infamous
  by Donald Rumsfeld’s comments around the Iraq War. Any sane / rational person
  can deal with known unknowns, it makes sense to get a grasp on things that you
  don’t have much context on or are uncertain about. Unknown Unknowns are more
  insidious and trickier to deal with. The question then is how do you take
  Unknown Unknowns and make them known and therefore easier to deal with?
---

Unknown Unknowns are things that you don’t know you don’t know, made infamous
by Donald Rumsfeld’s comments around the Iraq War. Any sane / rational person
can deal with known unknowns, it makes sense to get a grasp on things that you
don’t have much context on or are uncertain about. Unknown Unknowns are more
insidious and trickier to deal with. The question then is how do you take
Unknown Unknowns and make them known and therefore easier to deal with?

## How can you reduce the space of unknown unknowns?

First, before we jump into this question, lets define some properties of
unknown unknowns.

1. There are an infinite number of unknowns, you can think about this as
   inhabiting an infinite space. Where that space is defined as the inverse of
   known problems.

2. Therefore the more you know the less room Unknown Unknowns
   have to surface.

As they’re nearly infinite, it’s clear that some Unknown Unknowns are more
important than others. Where should we spend time looking to uncover the ones
that actually make a difference?

**Generally problems are much closer to the area you’re working in**, which
just makes intuitive sense. If you're working on a way to bring safe drinking
water to places that don't have it consistently you're not going to be
searching for possible issues in a paper about new computer chip technologies.
(If someone points you that direction it's another story.)

**You should focus on building out context and retaining it**, therefore
decreasing the space unknown unknowns can inhabit. It's important to choose a
few directions in which you want to focus, if you spread yourself thin across
may subjects you'll see less benefit. Many other people have the same skills
you've just acquired, making those skills less valuable. Ideally you're broad
enough to see the connections, but specialized enough to understand the
details.

**One person can only know so much**, so it’s important to leverage your peers
in understanding things that you don’t. There are certainly many things that
you do not know. Seek out people who increase the footprint of your knowledge,
making it more likely that unknown unknowns will be found.

## How can we make good choices when we acknowledge that there are unknown unknowns?

Once we acknowledge that Unknown Unknowns exist, it can be hard to make a
choice without spending exhaustive amounts of time trying to shake them out.
Fundamentally, how can we make sound choices with limited or partial
information?

First, it’s important to realize that the choices you make are only good or bad
given the information you had at the time. If you run into a bad unknown
unknown it wasn’t because you made a bad choice. We can’t judge ourselves as if
we had complete information about how things would have turned out.

Second, there’s no formula or process for this! You have to uncover unknown
unknowns until you’re confident you have a good understanding of the paths in
front of you. You should probably be slightly uncomfortable if you acknowledge
that you may hit a unknown unknown, that’s good and means you aren’t wasting
time building up unneeded context.

Knowing that unknown unknowns exist is the first step of the process, and
perhaps the most important. So we’ve already checked the first and largest box.
