---
title: Values in Software Design
date: '2018-06-24'
tags:
  - Software
  - Design
excerpt: >-
  I thought that the value of software comes for its reach, how much a person can
  accomplish using it. But that may have been a poor and disheartening way to
  view it. Poor in that it doesn't capture the true value of software and
  disheartening in that it forces a chase after more features and more
  complexity. Well designed software isn't really about what one _can_ accomplish
  while using it, but rather about how enjoyable it is for someone to use.
---

I thought that the value of software comes for its reach, how much a person can
accomplish using it. But that may have been a poor and disheartening way to
view it. Poor in that it doesn't capture the true value of software and
disheartening in that it forces a chase after more features and more
complexity. Well designed software isn't really about what one _can_ accomplish
while using it, but rather about how enjoyable it is for someone to use.

What we prioritise when making software has incredibly knock on effects down
the chain, and therefore choosing a set of values by which decisions are made
is absolutely critical. Valuing objective metrics like Time on Page or other
proxies for engagement is a easy position to find yourself in. Like most easy
positions you arrive at, this one is suboptimal. What we're trying to get at
with these sorts of metrics is a sense of how much a user enjoys using a
specific product.

The simplest way to get a sense of how much a user enjoys something is to **ask
them**. Feedback has the highest signal to noise ratio, more so than any other
metric. The question then is how do you take that feedback and iterate? In a
metrics driven approach you would A/B test solutions, and see which option
yields the best metrics. Facebook is known to use this approach when testing a
new feature set. It's equivalent to having a hunch and throwing it up on the
wall to see if it sticks. Now I don't mean to say that these hunches are
essentially random, but that the outcome of an experiment is wholly defined by
what metrics you measure. The metrics are driving product changes instead of
reasoned thought.

It's clear that people need to consider the total of available information, and
decide which direction to go forwards. When making such choices what ought to
be their north star? What framework should we use when deciding what to make,
how to represent it, and how to engineer it?

With the insight of _why_ a metric is behaving as it is, our view of the world
changes. Sometimes this changes our core principles, other times informing our
execution towards our north start, and occasionally correcting unfounded
assumptions. What's important is that we use the metrics to inform our view of
the world, rather then letting the metrics define the boundary of our world.

How does what a user experiences play into how we think about what to make and
how to approach it? Fundamentally, user empathy needs to be part of your
guiding principles. When a companies vision of the future aligns with an
individuals, a strong connection is formed as the individual actively wants the
company to exist in the world. The question of how to use metrics to inform
decision making requires people to sit down and think deeply about what they
are trying to achieve, there is no other substitute.
