---
title: VTest
permalink: /vtest/
excerpt: "VTest is designed to allow you to see bugs that you did not anticipate. It does
this by visualizing the results of function, and clustering their results. The
goal is to show you the absence of bugs, in order to do this, the functions
being tested have to be pure, and testing may be slow for functions that take
complex objects."
tags:
    - Ideas
    - Programming
date: '2015-11-25'
---

> Program testing can be a very effective way to show the presence of bugs, but
> it is hopelessly inadequate for showing their absence.

Edsger Dijkstra - The Humble Programmer (1972)

VTest is designed to allow you to see bugs that you did not anticipate. It does
this by visualizing the results of function, and clustering their results. The
goal is to show you the absence of bugs, in order to do this, the functions
being tested have to be pure, and testing may be slow for functions that take
complex objects. For the time being, I'm focusing on primitives only.

This pulls together Haskell's
[QuickCheck](http://hackage.haskell.org/package/QuickCheck-2.4.2), and a few
other testing frameworks. In the future I'd like to have it set so you can
specify invariants, for easier checking but that's not a priority. The use case
is a testing system to go along with your normal testing framework.

Part of the reason for this is that generating random data for testing requires
time, especially for through testing, then we have to run a dimensionality
reduction program to visualize the results.

## Simple Example

Here we're looking at the python function `startswith`. Yes, this is incredibly
simplistic. 1 represents truth and 0 falsity. We're testing the function on all
possible 3 length strings, in order to see how it behaves. The particular
function here is `s.startswith("g") or s.startswith("&")`, we can see here that
it returns true from `&!!` to `&~~` and `g!!` to `g~~`. Great thats exactly
what we wanted.

![Simple Demo](/assets/images/vtest-simple.png)

This obviously works for math as well. Here's `x^3/3`

![Math Demo](/assets/images/vtest-math.png)
